Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So as you've hopefully seen since I posted the announcement
NOTE CONF
on learn and not on Piazza.
And incidentally, last time I looked, only about half of
NOTE CONF
you were on Piazza, which is a bit disappointing because
the more people are there, the more people can answer
NOTE CONF
questions.
Um, the lectures are a little shuffled because there is
NOTE CONF
a special event next week.
Has Don yet told you about the special event next
NOTE CONF
week?
Oh well, it should be fun or interesting.
NOTE CONF
I won't steal his thunder because he arranged it.
So today we'll finish off what is normally week six.
NOTE CONF
And then tomorrow and Thursday we'll do what is nominally
week seven.
NOTE CONF
And on Friday, there's a vaguely Haskell related lecture by
somebody who's very eminent in the Haskell community.
NOTE CONF
And the reason he's here is because he also happens
to be the partner of the Miller lecture.
NOTE CONF
You all got my email about the Miller lecture.
You probably didn't notice it.
NOTE CONF
Or a few of you are coming.
Who does?
NOTE CONF
Remember getting email from me about a millner lecture?
Okay, so three of you remember it.
NOTE CONF
The other I, the others of you are either not
on top of your email or have extremely effective filters
NOTE CONF
for ignoring stuff that is not of interest.
So last week we were talking about Karnow Takano maps.
NOTE CONF
And these were this engineer's way of identifying a concise
formula that describes a particular truth table, if you will,
NOTE CONF
or part of a universe.
And we ended up discussing a few techniques.
NOTE CONF
We ended up discussing a few techniques for making them
short, which included things like looking for the rectangles that
NOTE CONF
are actually overlapping on the torus, the doughnut, and looking
for rectangles that overlap and therefore save you one variable.
NOTE CONF
Anybody have any questions about all that stuff?
Are you comfortable that you can go and do it?
NOTE CONF
It's pretty easy, so I hope you are.
It's really nice if you get it perfectly right, because
NOTE CONF
your tutorials are so much easier to mark when they're
all correct.
NOTE CONF
And this one of course is not easy to auto
mark.
NOTE CONF
So like most of the CL tutorials, the tutors actually
have to look at it and what they will do
NOTE CONF
is pattern match against the sample answers.
So if you can get the sample answers something similar
NOTE CONF
to that, that's great.
But in many of the cases there may be 1
NOTE CONF
or 2 different possible correct answers.
And then the tutors have to think which they don't
NOTE CONF
like, but it's good for them.
So what have we been doing?
NOTE CONF
If you look at the formulae we've been producing through
the whole string of exercises, they have something in common.
NOTE CONF
They all have the property that they are taking, a
union Of an even rectangle union of even rectangles.
NOTE CONF
So there's the union, the or, and the even rectangle
is being described by filtering it down by which rows
NOTE CONF
and columns it's true at.
So each rectangle is described by an and of things,
NOTE CONF
sometimes positive things and sometimes negative things.
And then we are oring together a bunch of rectangles.
NOTE CONF
This is a type of formula, a way of representing
formulae, which turns out to be very useful in many
NOTE CONF
ways.
So they are all ORS of ands, and the technical
NOTE CONF
name for it is slightly unhelpfully disjunctive normal form.
Why is it?
NOTE CONF
How many of you know what a normal form means?
So normally this is a mathematician use of the word
NOTE CONF
normal.
Phew.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You will see a lot of normal forms.
NOTE CONF
Um, you are doing linear algebra at the moment.
Have you not had any normal forms for matrices yet?
NOTE CONF
Are you expecting to get normal forms?
I think you probably will later in linear algebra, or
NOTE CONF
certainly next year.
Um, a normal form means a particular form of matrix
NOTE CONF
or formula or whatever that is highly constrained.
So it has a particular pattern it has to match.
NOTE CONF
And that makes it particularly easy to deal with.
Um, for example, if you're looking at matrices, there are
NOTE CONF
various tricks you can do, like changing the axes of
your coordinate system so that you can turn what is
NOTE CONF
a messy matrix even into sometimes a diagonal matrix, or
at least into a matrix with Um components with non-zero
NOTE CONF
entries in the upper right.
It's a long time since I did this, so I've
NOTE CONF
forgotten all the matrix normal forms.
But in logic we talk about putting a formula into
NOTE CONF
normal form to mean putting it into a particular shape
that is easy to deal with.
NOTE CONF
In some ways, it's not the case that a particular
normal form is always the best way to describe a
NOTE CONF
formula in every situation.
We'll see that in some cases, some normal forms are
NOTE CONF
better than others, but there are many applications where you
want to massage the formula into a shape that is
NOTE CONF
nice to deal with.
So this is disjunctive normal form.
NOTE CONF
I have always found this hard to remember its disjunctive
normal form.
NOTE CONF
It's disjunctive because the outermost combinator is an or.
We'll building an all of an and or is disjunction.
NOTE CONF
So this is called disjunctive normal form.
If you want to put it in more mathematical, traditional
NOTE CONF
notation, you can say that formally we have some formula
is in DNF.
NOTE CONF
If it has a bunch of what we call literals.
So these are either variables or negated variables.
NOTE CONF
Um so I've got that wrong haven't I?
A literal is a boolean variable.
NOTE CONF
And we allow literals or negated literals.
We take an and of those and then each of
NOTE CONF
those gives us an and and then we build up
an or so.
NOTE CONF
These are the rectangles and this is the union of
the rectangles in your formula.
NOTE CONF
So any questions about this as a definition of notation.
Is everybody now completely happy with the use of big
NOTE CONF
V and big wedge.
A multi-way.
NOTE CONF
And just like the sum notation, I index over whatever
is convenient.
NOTE CONF
So I'm indexing over j goes from one to however
many things I have in each clause.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Is anybody pedantic enough to notice an error in this
NOTE CONF
definition?
To do with the indexes.
NOTE CONF
Index.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, so that's because I'm intentionally not saying what the
index is ranging over because I don't know.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I can make it range over anything.
NOTE CONF
A bit more subtle than that.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That equals two.
And three is the same as I.
NOTE CONF
No.
So that's not the case because I've written Ige in
NOTE CONF
a particular order there.
Um, some people like to put commas between indexes.
NOTE CONF
I don't.
So, um, applied mathematicians tend not to put commas between
NOTE CONF
indexes and nor do we.
Does my definition of DNF say that all these ans
NOTE CONF
have to have the same number of literals in them.
And whether whether I'm this is an error is a
NOTE CONF
bit debateable really, given how sloppy I'm being, but kind
of suggests here that J is ranging over something fixed,
NOTE CONF
whereas actually it could be ranging over different things for
different I.
NOTE CONF
So P one might have J going from 0 to
3, p two might have J going from 0 to
NOTE CONF
2.
So if I were being really pedantic, I would write
NOTE CONF
j sub I and j sub I there to make
it clear that j doesn't have to range over the
NOTE CONF
same things for every value of I that I choose.
Um, we are generally not going to worry about that
NOTE CONF
level of pedantry, although when you program the stuff you
do, so when you program this stuff, you will need
NOTE CONF
to think about such things.
Any questions or comments?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so what have we been doing?
We have been taking a description of a formula in
NOTE CONF
terms of a truth table, basically, and converting it to
DNF by using our human intuition to recognise patterns.
NOTE CONF
As I said last week, we will do it more
mechanistically.
NOTE CONF
In fact, we will do it more mechanistically tomorrow.
But before that, I want to talk a little bit
NOTE CONF
more about Cono maps and other ways of looking at
it, and alternative normal forms.
NOTE CONF
Somebody asked a question about this on Piazza.
A little bit premature since I was going to talk
NOTE CONF
about it today.
Um, how many of you have actually read ahead in
NOTE CONF
the book about Cano maps?
Okay, I'm going to confuse you, but the rest of
NOTE CONF
you are not going to be confused because you haven't
done the reading.
NOTE CONF
So that's all right.
Um, well, I'm not going to confuse you because you
NOTE CONF
won't find it confusing, but I'm going to treat things
slightly differently from the way the book does.
NOTE CONF
Um, what we've been doing here is looking at the
places where the formula is true and building up a
NOTE CONF
description of that.
So here I described it as a and c or
NOTE CONF
a and b and D.
Sometimes you might see a truth table or part of
NOTE CONF
the universe or whatever, where on the face of it,
it's easier for you as a human to look at
NOTE CONF
the places where the thing is zero, rather than where
the thing is one.
NOTE CONF
So here is a map.
Um, if we do what we've done so far, what
NOTE CONF
is the right way?
What is the correct cono map description to pull out?
NOTE CONF
So think about that for a minute or two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I shouldn't need to think too hard about this because
this is about human intuition, but remembering some of the
NOTE CONF
slightly odd things that we've done in getting here.
Um, so how many rectangles do you find when you
NOTE CONF
do what we've done so far?
Who has four or more?
NOTE CONF
Who has three?
Who has two?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Who has one?
NOTE CONF
So I think that if we do what we did
before, we will get that.
NOTE CONF
So this is using both of the slightly tricky features
that we've done before.
NOTE CONF
Firstly remembering that this thing is on a Taurus.
So the rows wrap round.
NOTE CONF
So the pink area is just described by one rectangle
where b is false, and the green area is described
NOTE CONF
by one rectangle where d is false.
And it's also taking advantage of overlapping.
NOTE CONF
We can overlap the corners which lets us break it
down into just two rectangles, each of which is a
NOTE CONF
nice big rectangle.
Each of these rectangles covers half the grid.
NOTE CONF
So we have a very short formula describing it not
be or not D, which is perhaps not totally obvious,
NOTE CONF
right?
It certainly wasn't totally obvious to me.
NOTE CONF
So those of you with two rectangles presumably got that,
because I think that's the only way to do it
NOTE CONF
with two rectangles.
If you had 3 or 4, then you weren't being
NOTE CONF
quite efficient enough.
However, if I look at that thing, let's forget the
NOTE CONF
rectangles.
What's the pattern that obviously stands out to us as
NOTE CONF
humans?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
What we see at first sight, or at least what
I see at first sight, is the square of zeros
NOTE CONF
in the middle, which is one rectangle.
So why can't I describe it by one rectangle?
NOTE CONF
Well, it's because it's zero.
It's not one, But surely we shouldn't be hung up
NOTE CONF
on whether things are true or false or not.
We're just trying to describe the universe.
NOTE CONF
So if we look at the zeros, if we describe
the zero rectangle, this pink thing, then doing what we
NOTE CONF
did before that is b and d, is that right?
B d is true here, D is true here, B
NOTE CONF
is true here, B is true here.
So the pink rectangle is described by b and d.
NOTE CONF
And therefore we can say that the universe is described
by the formula not b and d because we're just
NOTE CONF
describing the negation of the pink rectangle.
Is that a DNF formula?
NOTE CONF
Who thinks it is a DNF formula.
Who thinks it definitely isn't a DNF formula?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Have to do something about all these undecided people.
How many times have I said that this must be
NOTE CONF
about number ten?
Um, it isn't DNF because a DNF formula is a
NOTE CONF
big disjunction of ands of literals or negative literals.
Well, this isn't a big disjunction at all because it's
NOTE CONF
got a knot on the outside.
For some reason I don't have a slide about this,
NOTE CONF
but.
Is there any manipulation we can do to this formula
NOTE CONF
to may turn it into something that is DNF?
I heard the right word any more.
NOTE CONF
People want to shut up the right word or words.
The Morgan.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I told you some weeks ago that you need
to have the Morgan in your head and ready to
NOTE CONF
apply instantly.
So if I do the Morgan to this, I get.
NOTE CONF
That which hopefully is what I got on the previous
slide, so that's fine.
NOTE CONF
So one approach to this is to look at the
zeros.
NOTE CONF
Say we've got a description of the zeros.
Negate that description and then use De Morgan to turn
NOTE CONF
it into the kind of formula we were looking for,
which is talking about positives.
NOTE CONF
Um, before I do a more complex example, any questions
about this example?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So here's a more complex example.
NOTE CONF
So this is another thing which has lots of ones
in a rather unhelpfully scattered way.
NOTE CONF
So we'll do the same little exercise.
So take a moment to analyse that as we did
NOTE CONF
last week, and see how many distinct rectangles you end
up using to describe that by looking at the ones.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So again, who has four or more rectangles?
NOTE CONF
Who has three?
Who has two?
NOTE CONF
Uh, okay.
Um, would you like to say how you got to.
NOTE CONF
Aha.
So these and those.
NOTE CONF
Now that doesn't count for us because it's not an
even rectangle.
NOTE CONF
It has length.
Side length.
NOTE CONF
Three rectangles have to have side length.
That is a power of two.
NOTE CONF
So 248 because that's the only way we can describe
them in terms of variables.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So this is what I believe is the most efficient
way to do it.
NOTE CONF
We take the centre thing, take this square and this
square, and again we do the overlapping technique.
NOTE CONF
And then that gives us a couple of squares which
are described by two variables.
NOTE CONF
And actually they're nice symmetrical things because this is a
nice symmetrical diagram.
NOTE CONF
And the central area is where B is won.
Um, but that was a bit of work, and on
NOTE CONF
the face of it, it's much easier to look at
this thing as a bunch of zeros.
NOTE CONF
So if I look at it as zeros, then I
just see the two simple rectangles here, and I end
NOTE CONF
up with a formula that looks like this.
Now this is where life is getting a bit complicated,
NOTE CONF
because what I have here is something that is definitely
not in disjunctive normal form, because it's a negation.
NOTE CONF
If I do the Morgan on this, am I going
to get a formula in DNF?
NOTE CONF
When I do to Morgan.
What happens?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So if you haven't internalised the Morgan yet, then.
NOTE CONF
Go back and think about what happens if I take
a negation and do the Morgan on it.
NOTE CONF
What does the Morgan say to Morgan?
Says the not of the or is the end of
NOTE CONF
the nots and the not of the and is the
not of the ORS.
NOTE CONF
What that ultimately means is if you take this negation
and you do Morgan all the way inside, what you
NOTE CONF
end up doing is simply changing Ands into ORS and
vice versa, and changing the negation of the inside things.
NOTE CONF
So if I have the Morgan internally in my head,
I can simply say.
NOTE CONF
It looks like that.
And I did not do that by laboriously applying to
NOTE CONF
Morgan twice to the outside and the inside.
I just used the shortcut of saying if I negate
NOTE CONF
something and push all the negations inward using the Morgan
High chain exchange, and ignore and flip the polarity of
NOTE CONF
all the literals here.
If they were positive, they become negative and vice versa.
NOTE CONF
Um, so what I've now got is something that has
an and on the outside I don't need these anymore.
NOTE CONF
And the and is joining together two formulae that have
alls in them.
NOTE CONF
That's not what we wanted for disjunctive normal form, but
it looks kind of similar, but opposite.
NOTE CONF
Do you think there might be a name for this?
Yeah, it might possibly be conjunctive normal form.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So disjunctive normal form is the and or of ands.
NOTE CONF
And conjunctive normal form is an and of ors.
So we can do it like that.
NOTE CONF
And then what can we do.
How much am I going to say before I go
NOTE CONF
on and say a little bit more about conjunctive normal
form?
NOTE CONF
Then those of you who've been reading the book will
have seen that the book treats examples like this differently.
NOTE CONF
Has anybody noticed that I'm doing it differently from the
book?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you read what the book says.
NOTE CONF
The book does this in using that magic word.
Again, the dual way to what we did last week.
NOTE CONF
So when we were looking at things, looking at the
ones in a corner map, we looked for rectangles, even
NOTE CONF
rectangles that we could take the union of in order
to find all the ones in the diagram.
NOTE CONF
The book says that if you're looking at a table
and you're trying to find the zeros and describe them
NOTE CONF
by rectangles, you should be looking for intersecting rectangles that
cover all the zeros.
NOTE CONF
I've tried.
I simply cannot do this.
NOTE CONF
My head will not let me calculate with intersecting rectangles
on a diagram.
NOTE CONF
And I suspect I'm probably not the only person who
finds that difficult.
NOTE CONF
So for me, it's much easier to do it this
way to build up the zeros, as in the same
NOTE CONF
way that we did for ones as a union of
rectangles, and then say, we're taking the negation of that,
NOTE CONF
and then just apply the negation using the Morgan, which
is guaranteed to work nicely.
NOTE CONF
If you read the book and you find that your
brain allows you to calculate with intersecting rectangles easily, I
NOTE CONF
would be very interested to know and have you talk
about the thought process that happens in your brain.
NOTE CONF
Because I tutored this course for a couple of years
before I started lecturing it, and that particular bit was
NOTE CONF
always a nightmare in the tutorials, so I didn't really
see why I should continue this nightmare.
NOTE CONF
Once I have control of the course.
Um, but there may be some people who can do
NOTE CONF
it that way.
Um, why are we so.
NOTE CONF
I've just shown you a formula in conjunctive normal form,
which is the obvious opposite of DNF.
NOTE CONF
Suppose I take a formula in DNF and I negate
it then, as I showed you just now, completely automatically
NOTE CONF
the negation is easy.
So if I take an Or of ans of something,
NOTE CONF
the not of an or of ans and something is
just the end of the AWS of the nots, it's
NOTE CONF
very simple and beautiful.
Um, is this obvious?
NOTE CONF
I give you any formula.
You can hit it with De Morgan's laws and the
NOTE CONF
distributive laws and all the other laws until you force
it into either DNF or CNF according to your choice.
NOTE CONF
So who thinks that's obvious.
Mhm.
NOTE CONF
So if maybe anybody think it's so completely unobvious that
it might not even be true.
NOTE CONF
Which leaves the rest of you thinking about how we
might convince ourselves that it's true.
NOTE CONF
So if I told you, go away and prove that
any formula can be turned into DNF, how would you
NOTE CONF
go about doing it?
And you haven't had much experience in doing proofs of
NOTE CONF
things, so probably.
You might find it a little difficult to think about
NOTE CONF
it mathematically.
But this is not just a course about logic.
NOTE CONF
How else can you convince yourself that you can do
something.
NOTE CONF
Quick check.
Well, quick check convinces you that you've done something right.
NOTE CONF
Or at least it doesn't convince you.
It gives you high confidence.
NOTE CONF
First of all, you have to do the thing, right.
You program it right.
NOTE CONF
So rather than saying, can you go away and prove
that any formula can be converted into DNF, if I
NOTE CONF
instead said, go away and write a program to turn
any formula into DNF, would that be significantly less intimidating?
NOTE CONF
Not for everybody, no.
Um, that's a shame, because you're going to do it,
NOTE CONF
I think.
Or are you going to do it?
NOTE CONF
I can't remember, maybe I'm going to do it.
At least one of us is going to do it.
NOTE CONF
Um, but you're becoming experienced Haskell programmers.
And you know what to do with Haskell with.
NOTE CONF
Haskell, you do recursive functions which break things down and
build them up again.
NOTE CONF
So what's the obvious way to start massaging a formula?
Break it down if it's an and do something with
NOTE CONF
the two halves if it's an or do something.
So I think maybe I will give you that to
NOTE CONF
go away and think about before tomorrow.
So for the moment, you can take my word for
NOTE CONF
it that any Boolean expression can be converted before we
start talking about it tomorrow, which we will do.
NOTE CONF
Think about how you would do it, or think about
why it should perhaps be relatively straightforward, or at least
NOTE CONF
straightforward to do somehow, although maybe not obvious how to
do efficiently.
NOTE CONF
Up here I said that it's straightforward to take a
conjunctive model.
NOTE CONF
Either way, round a DNF formula negate it, and the
negation is in CNF.
NOTE CONF
This is a slightly more interesting question.
If I give you a formula in DNF.
NOTE CONF
So without the negation there, can you convert it to
CNF?
NOTE CONF
So can you turn it, take a formula that is
an all of a Nand and turn it into a
NOTE CONF
formula that is an and of ORS.
I've told you just here that this can always be
NOTE CONF
done.
So the answer to can you convert.
NOTE CONF
It must be yes.
But you might wonder what happens.
NOTE CONF
Do formulae get bigger when they when you change them
to try and turn them into one of these normal
NOTE CONF
form?
Do you have any guesses as to how much bigger
NOTE CONF
a formula might get?
If I give you some random formula in DNF and
NOTE CONF
I say hit it with the Morgan until it turns
into CNF.
NOTE CONF
Might it get bigger or smaller?
And it might get either bigger or smaller I suppose.
NOTE CONF
But any guesses on how bad things can be?
So double the size.
NOTE CONF
So we think maybe the formula gets twice as big
if we hit it until it turns into CNF.
NOTE CONF
Any advance on doubling.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So I still can't hear two to the n exponential
growth.
NOTE CONF
Genuine exponential growth.
Um any other ideas?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So exponential growth is the right answer.
NOTE CONF
If you take formula which has n symbols in it,
and it's in DNF and you convert it to CNF,
NOTE CONF
you might end up with a formula that has two
to the N symbols in it.
NOTE CONF
Is this bad news?
So for the kind of formulae we deal with, they
NOTE CONF
are typically for, I don't know, two, three, four, maybe
ten symbols long.
NOTE CONF
So even for that two to the n is not
very pleasant, because two to the ten is 1024.
NOTE CONF
However, where is all this stuff actually used?
This stuff is actually used in automated description of circuits
NOTE CONF
and proofs and things.
And there the formulae might be thousands or tens of
NOTE CONF
thousands of symbols long.
And you do not want.
NOTE CONF
Do not want exponential growth on something 10,000 symbols long
because our computers cannot deal with it.
NOTE CONF
So it's a very interesting question, which we will partly
answer in the next week or two, about whether it's
NOTE CONF
possible to convert between DNF and CNF without getting this
disastrous growth.
NOTE CONF
Um, I am filling in time a bit, but I
think we'll just finish early.
NOTE CONF
But before we finish early, do before tomorrow.
Think about both of these things.
NOTE CONF
Firstly, think about how you would go about converting a
formula into DNF or CNF given just some arbitrary formula.
NOTE CONF
And secondly, see if you can come up with the
kind of example that gives you nasty growth.
NOTE CONF
See if you can come up with a little formula
in DNF that gets much, much bigger if you try
NOTE CONF
to convert it into CNF.
It's not an easy exercise for people who are not
NOTE CONF
familiar with this kind of thing, but you might find
yourself coming up with it.
NOTE CONF
So.
So tomorrow I will move on to the mechanistic, the
NOTE CONF
algorithmic conversion of formulae into DNF, which is a pretty
cool topic for reasons that I will be happy to
NOTE CONF
explain tomorrow.
But before we do that, any final questions or any
NOTE CONF
comments or questions about anything else in the course?
Okay, so we have ten minutes free time, which is
NOTE CONF
good because I have a meeting about something else to
deal with.
NOTE CONF
So see you tomorrow.